# 20222

## March

### 2022-03-18

#### [Stanley Druckenmiller @ Lost Tree Club, 2015](https://gist.github.com/timhwang21/e6a2b24e064182dd9099ad00e4f4f9a6)

Fitting read now, 7 years down the line.

### 2022-03-05

#### [How does this end? (Commentary on Russia/Ukraine)](https://carnegieendowment.org/2022/03/03/how-does-this-end-pub-86570)

> Would NATO’s door remain open to a Russian-dominated Ukraine? Probably, but it would be similar to claiming that NATO’s door is open to North Korea or Iran (which it theoretically is). All of the consequences that are likely from this conflict—growing conventional force buildup on the NATO-Russia border, higher levels of defense spending in the United States at the expense of domestic programs, an end to efforts to draw down U.S. military posture in the Middle East, and fewer resources for strategic competition with China—would still be a better outcome than the alternative, in which nuclear weapons have been used.

## February

### 2022-02-20

#### [Airplanes and films]

These days, I seem to do the majority of my movie-watching on planes. I have an exceptionally poor attention span, and being trapped in an airborne aluminum tube for five hours is just about all that motivate me to commit to a movie. Recent standouts:

- The Green Knight. I'm a fan of slow burns, so this didn't bore me like it seems to have many critics. I also vibe heavily with the understated writing and the surreal, magical realism atmosphere.
- Dune. I actually saw this at a movie theater as well, but the direction is stunning enough to be worth watching on an 8-inch screen.
- Another Round. An exploration of midlife crisis, marital conflict, ennui, and the temptation of aalcohol as an escape? A little too real, but the movie was beautifully executed.

### 2022-02-15

#### Meeting strategy

It seems that the optimal structure and participants of a meeting depends on whether the agenda is suited for a one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-many structure.

By default, meetings tend to be many-to-many or one-to-one. One-to-one meetings are their own can of worms, but are generally efficient with respect to peoples' time. Many-to-many meetings, on the other hand, can be enormously wasteful.

When approaching an agenda item, one should consider what the desired goal of the item is. Is it to solicit feedback? In a many-to-many structure, this can degenerate into an unstructured brainstorming session. Many people may have ideas, but only one person can talk at once -- and worse, others may "thread" a conversation, making it hard for people to raise other ideas. Consier a one-to-many approach instead: raise the proposal to a group, but request feedback asynchronously. You may receive some duplicate feedback, but frequency is a valid signal to consider when feedback is concerned. Why take valuable group time to raise the proposal instead of doing that asynchronously as well? In a non-remote-first environment, good luck getting your idea on others' radars.

What if the goal is to determine consensus? A many-to-many structure may indeed make sense. (Note that determining consensus is not the same as making a decision! Group-based decision making tends to be unwise.) Ensuring that everyone is aligned is psychologically powerful, and synchronicity can amplify that.

## January

### 2022-01-25

#### [Tinybase](https://tinybase.org/api/checkpoints/interfaces/checkpoints/checkpoints/): a JavaScript library for structured state

(By "structured state," what is meant is tabular state.)

Interesting contrast to the functional approach taken by much of the React world (and notably Redux). Achieves many of the same goals (and several other unique ones) with a philosophical foundation in database design rather than in functional programming.

The idea of relationships and checkpoints seem the most powerful to me. Redux has had a lifelong issue with handling relational changes to denormalized data, and the common way to track undo/redo with Redux feels like a more primitive version of checkpoints.

(With that being said, I think there's still unexplored territory for Redux undo/redo. Rather than tacking something on to existing reducers, what if a reducer were designed from the bottom up to be undoable? Imagine if every action had a `meta: 'up' | 'down'` like for database migrations, and reducers knew how to undo each action. Now there is no need to store an undo stack.)

### 2022-01-23

#### [Why There Is No Good NFT Art (Yet?)](https://caesuramag.org/posts/laurie-rojas-why-no-good-nft-yet)

> NFTs have not only opened the door wide open for the crypto bros’s capital to finally have something to buy, speculate, and fight over; they have shown that no matter how “decentralized” or “transparent” the whole blockchain infrastructure (or “protocol”) is, it is still a capitalist jungle, though with the delusion that the jungle is a playground. What happened with Beeple’s record-breaking sale at auction, which was bought by two crypto billionaires to inflate the value of crypto, is no different than what collectors do to inflate the price of their Andy Warhols by up-bidding new lots on the auction floor, which is illegal but nonetheless still happens. But no one in their right mind would ever say Beeble’s works are good Art, while we can argue differently with Warhol, Koons, and Hirst.

> NFTs (art, Deviant, memes, and otherwise) will end up in the same place as everything else on the internet, which is the same place as everything else in late capitalism: controlled by a few mega corporations, which the government (the state) will assist in their exploitation, surveillance, and censorship of the small/individual players. Just as the Democrats ruined social media. Signs of clashes already abound from sports stars/channels producing collectible “celebrity NFTs” that feed upon the “little guy” making Deviant/burner art NFTs, while Hermès is suing an artist for its MetaBirkins NFT on grounds of trademark infringement.

Related read to the second quote: [Report: The Diminishing Marginal Value of Aesthetics](https://subpixel.space/entries/diminishing-marginal-aesthetic-value/)

#### ["Prism" micro-interaction](https://h2hhn.csb.app/)

I was watching some old runway shows after catching up with the latest of PFW 2022. [Anrealage 18AW 'Prism'](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VNmXyyN5KQc) inspired this CSS micro-interaction. Specifically, [the logo](https://i.imgur.com/IrF2m9K.png).

[Source](https://codesandbox.io/s/anrealage-button-h2hhn).

### 2022-01-22

#### Good reads lately

[**How “Engineering-Driven” Leads to “Engineering-Supremacy”**](https://charity.wtf/2022/01/20/how-engineering-driven-leads-to-engineering-supremacy/)

Resonated with me not only because I find the points spot on, but also because the culture Charity describes at Honeycomb fits my own personal ideal of a model culture to strive for, and seems like a more mature form of the culture we're trying to foster at Persona. Even the timeline of Honeycomb's evolution as an organization tracks with us.

[**An Anatomy of Bitcoin Price Manipulation**](https://www.singlelunch.com/2022/01/09/an-anatomy-of-bitcoin-price-manipulation/)

This is a fun one for sure. I've believed the conclusions described here for a long time, but admittedly that belief was based on my personal view of what was likely given the landscape (media-driven price + presence of large "whales" + lack of regulation) rather than hard evidence.

[**On -Cores**](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13-qLZzgENG8Rbacf68agh0XC7a1YVgHInGJ2oMQsbFY/)

Long treatise on aesthetics. I find the writing style an interesting blend of fairly unrefined prose, deep technical knowledge (of film, cinematography, art history, culture, and philosophy), and references to modern-day memes. Undecided if it's an idiosyncratic writing style or an intentional "high-low" mixing to match the subject matter (a "high-level" analysis of the "low-level" phenomenon of youth/internet culture) .
